---
title: "Video Games"
date: 2018-04-29T12:51:45-06:00
draft: false
author: "John Borden"
email: "bjorkbat@gmail.com"
---
Should you decide to become an entrepreneur and work for yourself, the most common advice you'll receive is that you're going to need a killer work ethic.  There's some disagreement on what exactly that entails, but a common idea is that you need to change your lifestyle to kill certain old habits.  You can't drink nearly as often as before, you'll have to cut short most outings with friends, say goodbye to your Netflix subscription.  A lot of hard things that have to be done, and you haven't even built a business yet.

Oh, and the video games, they'll definitely have to go.  You can't run a business if you play video games all day.

That last part, as it happens, is rather painful advice for a lot of aspiring entrepreneurs who have spent a lot of time playing as Mario, Sonic, Master Chief, Doom Guy, The Lone Wanderer, and various other game characters.  Let's dive in.

## The Mario Boundary

Truth is, this wouldn't be all that hard to do 3 or 4 decades ago.  Pong started off as a bar amusement that wasn't too distant from pinball.  You played it for a bit, but you weren't obsessed about it like people now are with video games.  Even when Pong shifted from arcade amusement to one of the many titles on the Atari 2600 it was really hard to become obsessed with an amusing new form of entertainment that a lot of people thought was destined to become just another fad.  Could you really blame them?  Centipede is a fun classic.  Centipede also has very little playtime per session (i.e. playtime between when you start and when you inevitably die) and a very simple and consistent formula.  It doesn't change much from level to level.  It just gets a bit harder.  Nothing particularly new or novel ever happens in the game.

But things gradually changed over time.  We got Mario.  He's been around for, what, 3 decades now?  He's clearly special, especially since he came after the video game crash of the early 80s when video games were presumed dead.  There are a lot of arguments as to why the Mario brand is so great, but to me the answer is simple.  He's an actual character, with personality.  By contrast most video games before Mario were devoid of actual characters, besides Pac Man, who as it happens is also still alive and well in the present, albeit not as much as Mario.  On top of that, the game world was actually rather varied.  The levels didn't simply get harder.  They changed.  There were "worlds" that we got to explore through our avatar, Mario.  When we finally got to the end, we were treated to a climactic boss fight and got to rescue the beautiful princess.

I can't help but wonder if Mario's staying power comes from the fact that it presented us the opportunity to experience a story more fascinating than our own.  Getting the princess in the real world is not easy.  It has no distinct formula.  By contrast, if you play Mario through to the end, if you do what you're supposed to do and master the game, then you'll journey through a lot of worlds and kill a lot of Goombas before defeating Bowser and rescuing the princess.

## Gaming Vicariously

Since then, one could argue that games have evolved in such a direction that the characters became more developed, more complex.  On top of that, the story got more interesting.  Zelda is a classic example of this.  In Zelda we essentially have one of the first Role Playing Games.  Not only did you control the hero Link, but the story took a less linear shape.  You didn't explore a world where the only right way to go was, well, right.  Instead, you could go any direction you pleased in the world, purchase basic equipment as you saw fit, and overall choose to accomplish your mission in a manner that involved more choice.  Oh, and there's still a beautiful princess to rescue, but this time you had a little more choice and freedom in how you choose to rescue her.

Choice, as it happens, is a very powerful game mechanic.  When Fallout came out it took this to a new frontier by letting you pick pick from more than one preset character, or customize your own unique character.  Maybe you'll create someone who's like you, maybe you'll create someone who definitely isn't you, but resembles a character archetype you *want* to be, perhaps you'll play as an archetype you simply find fascinating.  You can interact with characters across the Fallout world through variety of interesting dialogue options, you defeat your enemies using a turn-based strategy approach that gave you more control over how to handle conflict, you buy and sell your way to an awesome equipment loadout, and by the end of the game your badass character and their badass friends save the world.  The game became an outstanding commercial and critical success and the franchise persists to this day.

Strategy games are an interesting case of a genre where the characters you controlled didn't become more developed.  Rather, you are the character, and everyone keeps referring to you as general, commander, your majesty, boss, etc, and entrust you to make the right decisions to win the war, grow the empire, build the business, whatever.  Your character didn't become more developed, but the decisions you could make on behalf of whatever thing you controlled became more interesting.  The Civilization series of games pioneered the use of scientific research and the research tech tree.  Not only did it let you decide how much science would matter to your nation, but it also let you decide which direction you would take your nation in terms of what technologies would be researched ahead of others.

Finally, there's the first person shooter genre, games like Doom, but later Halo, Call of Duty, Overwatch, etc.  Character development isn't so important here.  What matters is the sensation of plowing through hordes of enemies and the thrill of picking up a minigun or other insanely powerful weapon that cuts through baddies like a hot knife cuts through butter.  It's worth pointing out that in real life there's no way you'd have the physical strength necessary to wield a minigun, but in this game world such restrictions do not exist.

The thread that binds all these games together is that as games became more developed they allowed us to live vicariously through whoever it was we controlled.  In the infancy of video games this simply wasn't possible.  You couldn't really live vicariously through Missile Command or Centipede, but you could definitely do so through Fallout.  We don't always get what we want in life.  Most of us have ho-hum jobs.  Some of us don't have any romantic partners, and even if we do they usually have a host of flaws and imperfections that occasionally get under our skin.  We're honestly not that physically strong.  Mentally we're kinda smart but not heroically smart.  Gaming gives us the opportunity to be a badass, rescue a princess, rule a nation, defeat your enemies, etc.  Gaming lets us be who we want to be, and serves up the rewards and accomplishments fast and hot.  It would be wonderful, it it weren't for the occasional suspicion that our own lives might be better if we didn't invest so much time into a simulated life.

## An Embarrassing Personal Anecdote

Have you ever heard of The Sims?  It's pretty unique as far as games go in that it's basically a simulation of everyday mundane life.  You control a Sim, or rather a whole variety of Sims, which are basically just ordinary simulated people.  They live in fairly boring homes, have jobs which aren't too far from the ordinary, and throughout the course of the day engage in a host of exciting activities such as using the bathroom, cooking breakfast, watching TV, sleeping, working, painting, etc.

The franchise is ridiculously popular.  Since the first game came out a host of sequals have come out along with various game expansions and the occasional spin-off.  It has no plot, nor any really developed characters.  What it does have is the ability to create digital avatars of ourselves and live vicariously though them.  We can build elaborate houses filled with nice things, reach the top of our career, even fall in love with the partner of our dreams.  That last bit is pretty significant in that the way romance in the Sims work is hilariously formulaic and incredibly unrealistic compared to romantic interactions in the real world.  See, physical attraction in the game doesn't matter at all.  To get one of these simulated people to fall in love with your Sim only requires persistent.  Your Sim need only talk to them, a lot, building friendship points along the way.  After about a single day in game time you'll have become warm enough with the other Sim to where you're able to flirt with them and build a completely distinct set of romance points.  Flirting leads to kissing, kissing leads to the game's weird PG version of sex, and within about 5 game days your Sim is so involved with this other Sim that they could probably successful propose to this other Sim and even marry them on the spot without any need for elaborating wedding planning.

I know all this because I've played all of the main games in the franchise.

It was satisfying, for a while, but I could never enjoy it too much due to the guilt in the back of my head.  You see, if I enjoyed the game for too long of a time, the guilt would remind me that I'm wasting valuable time in the real world on a crude simulation of it.  Everything I aspired for and eventually got in this simulated world I could have in real life, and all it would really take is just hard work.  Nothing hard or unrealistic.  Just a lot of hard work.  Meanwhile, I have no tangible idea of how comfortable my Sim's bed is, all I know is that it's the most comfortable one in the game and he seems happy sleeping in it next to his wife with whom he's shared no personal vulnerabilities nor truly meaningful conversations.  He does, however, have a lot of sex with her, and that keeps the relationship as strong as it possibly can be within the game's parameters.

Whatever I did in the game was the consequence of a choice to choose the fast but fleeting rewards in the simulated life over the harder but more meaningful ones in my actual life.  Eventually I decided it was too dumb of a choice to have to make.

## Choosing Time / Commitment

Here's the thing, the reason why people tell you that you have to give up all these things to be an entrepreneur is because you simply won't have time for them anymore.  You need to commit time towards your business.  You can't hang out with your friends as often anymore because knowing that you're choosing them over the company that you're building, and unfortunately the company is still far from where you'd like it to be.  

Still, no one ever says you should cut all contact with your friends and focus 100% on your business.  Otherwise, your happiness will plummet, you'll burn out, existential questions will start to pop up and you'll be wondering why you're doing this to yourself and you'll likely just give up.  You need to have fun, and you especially need to have fun with friends.  You just need to get really good at balancing how much work you really should be doing against your desire to have fun.

So, could you still keep up your video game habit?

You know, maybe you could.  Maybe you could be a successful entrepreneur AND find a way to play video games in moderation.  It's going to be tricky though.  It's not as simple a choice as choosing between having fun and working on your company.  The reason I wrote at length about how games allow us to live vicariously through the characters inside of them is because it isn't as simple as choosing between having fun and working.  Instead, the choice usually becomes something between spending time in your real life (which includes the time spent working on your company along with your social activities) against spending time playing a simulated life where you get to live vicariously though a character who probably has a better or more interesting life than yours.  Sometimes we choose video games over work.  Sometimes we choose video games over leaving the house and being with our friends.

Given the commitment that building a company requires and the work it takes to maintain your friendships while you're building your company, it should come as no surprise that a lot of people say you should just avoid video games.  Commit to your life.  Commit not only to your company and your ideas, but also to your friendships, to your loved ones, and to the things that make you not just happy but also fulfilled.  To live vicariously through a video game is to avoid that commitment.  When you think about it that way, giving up video games kind of becomes a no-brainer.

## The Virtues of Games

I feel a requirement to include this section in here because, the truth is, I do benefit from video games.  Video games actually have a lot to teach about creating experiences and mechanics that really engage people's attention.  If you're clever enough, you could take some of these lessons and ideas and use them to turn more mundane experiences fun.  I'm actually working on that now through a project I call [Business Toybox](https://businesstoybox.co), which uses game mechanics (or gamification, if you really must) to make the process of business model validation and customer discovery fun.  I also firmly believe that we learn more effectively when we acquire knowledge through play vs through lecture, and I believe game mechanics could be used to make learning in particular much more effective.  I learned a lot about how to build great products and experiences through video games.

Does this mean I should give myself more time to play video games in order to gain more hands-on knowledge?  Well, no, I really don't think so, because I'm an entrepreneur and I need to commit to my life and my company.  I think what's more valuable is getting the important details from experts on game design through books, videos, and personal interaction with an actual game designer.  Once I think I understand how it works from an expert's own words, I can try these ideas on for size on Business Toybox.  If the experience is more fun and engaging to both myself and others, then great.  I've not only learned but learned through a hands-on experience.  Along the way I might even develop some unique insights that the game designers might have missed.

## Mars

So, here's an extreme case.  Recently I tried out Surviving Mars and got hooked hard (it's largely why I'm writing this blog post in the first place).  It's a simple enough formula, you're the commander of a mission to colonize Mars.  You start out with next to nothing, create a fledgling outpost, and through research and constant building work your way to a sci-fi utopia.  Great stuff.  I got to do something that, realistically, I probably won't ever be able to do.

Meanwhile, Elon Musk is living the dream as CEO of SpaceX.  Oh, sure, he hasn't sent any humans to Mars yet, but he has sent his own car into space using a custom-built rocket.  That's insanely cool.  What's important is that it's not like Elon Musk has any special innate advantages, such as family wealth, which were responsible for where he's at now.  Instead, he capitalized on the dot-com boom of the late 90s / early 2000s, got rich through PayPal (not Bill Gates rich though, he made approximately $150 million), and basically invested all that money into SpaceX.  He got to where is is now, arguably, through hard work, and by hard work I mean committing to his life and his company.

He's still very, very far away from being able to send humans to Mars, let alone build a sci-fi utopia up there.  Still, what he's been able to experience dwarfs the rewards and accomplishment I got out of playing a game that let me build a Martian colony.

I don't know, maybe you and I could even build our own Martian colony if we really committed to the effort.  Maybe we'd be happy enough just for trying it.
